Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Dr. Teresa
Barron. She's assistant professor of at Nottingham University, and
today we're going to talk about the ethics of
procreation. So Dr. Barron, welcome to the show again.
It's always a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Lovely to be back.
OK, so first of all, uh, let me start
with the general question. What is the ethics of
procreation? I mean, what kinds of questions do you
tackle there?
Well, it's a, it's a pretty broad area, I
suppose. But if you had to boil it down
to one kind of key question. It would be,
um, how and why do we bring children in
the world? And is it OK? Uh, SO, you
know, the moral question of, um, bringing other people
into existence, something that It's I think a fairly
new question for humanity. If you look at the
the the the lifespan of philosophy, um, procreation has
been almost an inevitability. It it's only been something
that we have been avoiding and very carefully managing
on a larger scale for less than 100 years.
Um, AND so this question of how and when
to have children and why, um, is Only a
few generations old as as a broad thing, you
know, it's it's something that people have always been
thinking about, um, at a smaller scale, but. I
think the the. Regularity with which people are now
asking, should I have children, when should I have
children, why am I having children is much newer.
But are you saying that it's much newer within
philosophy, academic philosophy, particularly, or do you think that
also in the broader context of our societies, people
are also now asking those questions more often?
I think it's a bit of both. I think
philosophy that there's been the occasional scholar digging into
this question for, you know, hundreds, thousands of years.
But as a more general question, um, I think
this has really entered the social consciousness much more
recently. And of course that then has an effect
on philosophy. So philosophers have been more interested in
procreative ethics and in larger numbers over the last
sort of 50 to 100 years, partly because of
these changes in You know, uh, social structuring and
medical availability, um, different kinds of contraceptives, IVF, all
of these different advances in scientific technology that have
made it possible to make decisions about how and
when to have children that were not decisions at
a large scale before. It used to be that
for the vast majority of people. Um, Procreation was
very much tied into sexuality. Um, AND on the
converse side, if you wanted children and you couldn't
have them through kind of natural means, there wasn't
a lot that you could do about it. So
I think it's only really in much more recent
history that this has become something that people have
to make decisions about that isn't just sort of
up to fate. And I think as soon as
something becomes An object of decision making, it has
a deliberative quality that means you not only can
think about it, but you have to think about
it. I think this is where the ethical component
comes in, that as soon as something is voluntary.
Um, IT'S, it has responsibility attached to it. We,
we acquire new kinds of obligation, not only when
we do the thing, but when we're deciding whether
or not to do the thing.
So let's perhaps discuss or go through some of
the most common justifications we hear from people when
they justify having children or wanting to have children.
And see if they are philosophically, ethically solid. So
one of them has to do with impulse or
instinct. We hear very commonly from people that we
have this sort of procreative instinct or there's An
impulse or there's for example a maternal or a
paternal instinct that people are just born or we
have evolved to have this sort of want to
create to procreate to have children so I mean
how do you approach that kind of justification?
It's a really interesting one because it's something that
is very widely reported, but it's also not reported
as often as the kind of mythology around it
would suggest. And when you're growing up, especially if
you're growing up as a girl, you'll hear very
often, but if you express the the the perspective
that you might not want to have children, people
will regularly say, oh, but you wait until that
maternal instinct kicks in, you know, you won't be
able to avoid it. Um, AND now that I'm,
I'm now I'm 31, I'm at the age where
one would expect this maternal instinct to be materializing
all over the place. And very, very few women
that I've met of this age, including the ones
who do want to have children, very few of
them describe feeling the kind of dramatic biological urge
that is described in this kind of mythology around
it, the kind that you would expect to sort
of take over your life in in the way
that people describe. And I'm sure there are people
who experience an impulse that is that kind of
that strong and that maybe overturns preferences they had
earlier in life. But um, certainly anecdotally, it doesn't
seem to be as powerful as people give it
credence for. Um, WHICH then kind of opens interesting
philosophical questions about it because for one thing, if
it's not as powerful as people give it credence
for, then it probably loses some justificatory power. But
also, it's interesting that we have been giving it
justificatory power for such a long time when there
is no other area of life in which appeal
to some kind of biological impulse is taken as.
A moral justification. And in fact, we, we have
a very dim view of appeals to instinct as
a justification for other kinds of actions, particularly, um,
you know, not that I want to draw a
direct association, but, um, when people describe Impulse as
the reason behind acts of violence or sexual abuse.
We we do not accept that kind of logic.
Um, AND we expect we hold ourselves to a
very high standard as you know, um, the rational
animal. We we generally think that people should be
in control of their impulses and should be making
decisions, particularly massive life decisions on the basis of
Reasoned deliberation and careful choices rather than just sort
of giving in to instinct or or impulse. So
I think it's interesting not only that we expect
that kind of maternal paternal instinct to kick in,
but that we almost encourage it and we say
no, no, well when it arrives, you you must
give into it, you know, whatever your preferences were
before, even if you didn't want children, once that
maternal instinct arrives, you'll you'll end up having them.
I think that's a really interesting flipping of our
normal logic.
Yeah, no, that's a very good point because I
think that, or at least it doesn't come to
my mind, any other area, any other kind of
situation where people would accept a justification or a
behavior or an action justified on the basis of
impulse or instinct, particularly if it has a bad
outcome. Outcomes like for example violence as you mentioned,
I mean people usually say that if of course
and this falls outside of the scope of this
conversation and I don't want to get here into
a discussion about whether really we have an instinct
or an impulse or whether it's biological acquired or
learned for us to be violent or for us
to have this or. That kind of behavior, I
mean that that's beside the point here, but I
mean, people usually say that at least if you're
about to do something, you're about to do something
on the basis of impulse or instinct, you should
take a step back. I mean, take a few
seconds, think twice. I mean things like that, right?
Yes,
exactly, exactly. We have this whole framework discouraging people
from acting on instinct. In most areas of life,
um, you know, even in areas as, uh, low
stakes compared to having children as, you know, shopping,
we say, oh, well, don't don't make impulse purchases,
you know, wait, go back the next day if
you still want it. But, but, uh, yeah, we,
we give, um, we give so much power to
the procreative instinct if there is one, And I'm
not sure that there is or that there or
that that kind of instinct manifests the same way
for for lots of people. Um, AND that's I
guess a different kind of question, you know, if
there is such an instinct, what is it? But
I think at least when it comes to this
idea of justification, when it comes to why should
we have children, um, saying, well, I had the
instinct to do so is for philosophers at least
is very poor reasoning.
Yeah, and I mean that's actually another very interesting
question. Do you think that we really have such
an an instinct to reproduce, or is it just
sort of an instinct, an instinct or an impulse
that usually kicks in around puberty, adolescence to have
Sex to feel attracted to either the opposite sex
or the same sex that then I mean could
lead to reproduction but it's not really us having
having an instinct to reproduce or wanting to reproduce
because I guess that. Those would be two different
things. I mean, uh, having an instinct to have
sex and having an instinct to reproduce, those are
not necessarily the same thing.
They're definitely not the same thing, especially when we
sort of look at the range of of sexual
orientations and sexual practices in in human behavior and
realize how many of those do not lead to
procreation. Um, SO I think they're definitely separate. Um,
AND of course, you know, we can look at
our, we can look at our, our, um. Cultural
conditioning now that we have had this sort of
separation of sexual behavior from procreative behavior, um, for
a few generations now that it's sort of been
expected that people will manage their sexual behaviors to
avoid procreation until the time at which they they
are seen as responsibly procreating. Um, THAT'S, I guess,
at least for for people growing up today. Part
of the, um, understandings that we have about sexuality
have very deliberately detached them from from procreation. But
we can also look further back in our um
in our evolution as as animals to see that
at some point, That our our own biology began
to separate sexuality from from procreation. So we can
look, for example, at the fact that humans are
one of only a small number of mammals that
don't go into heat. We don't have the same
kind of Easter cycle in which, uh, You know,
if you, if you imagine, uh, your, your cat
at home, if before you get it fixed, um,
and it starts yowling and scratching the walls and
demanding to get out, your cat becomes very, very
horny because it's now fertile and that fertility window
changes its sexual behavior. Um, HUMANS work very differently.
We don't have, uh, an Easter cycle. We can
essentially put ourselves into heat, um, very regularly because
we have evolved with erogenous zones that are, are
sort of much more, um, much more like buttons
that can be turned on and off rather than
something that is tied directly to our fertility. Um,
AND that evolutionary at that evolutionary journey. Has enabled
us to develop sexual practices that have nothing to
do with procreation and sexual desires that have nothing
to do with procreation to the point where we
can detach them quite comfortably from each other. So
it's, I think, partly a question of culture and
social conditioning, but I think you can, you can
go all the way back for hundreds of thousands
of years and find the beginnings of that in
our evolution. Um, JUST, you know, we, we, uh,
I guess can become that we have a much
more regularly occurring fertile window than other animals that
only go into heat once or twice a year
and are then ready to go. But we can
become sort of sexually aroused much more often than
we have those fertile windows. So yeah, I think
biologically, there there's also part of the explanation lies
there.
What about justifications based on meaning, and these ones
are kind of interesting because sometimes we also hear
them from scientists themselves like evolutionary biologists, for example,
when they say that our purpose, or at least
in their specific case our biological purpose is to
prove. Create and other people, I mean lay people,
I mean it's also very frequently that we hear
that that we are here to procreate. That's our
purpose. That's what's, that's what gives meaning to our
life. So what do you make of that kind
of argument or justification for procreation?
I think it's a very strange argument to make
if you don't believe in some kind of Destiny
or or or ultimate creator, you know, people who
who, for example, have a religion that says, well,
you have been designed by a higher being to
follow this path. I can see how that might,
you know, that that kind of narrative around it
might make sense. But I think to speak about
a purpose of human existence, if without that backstory,
without the idea of a creator who gave us
that purpose, um, is is very difficult to to
ground in anything. And I think that You know,
humans are incredible in their capacity to find purpose
and to find meaning and to create meaning. I
think that if there's anything, um, that we You
know, quote unquote might be designed to do. It
will, it will be to create, I but I
don't think necessarily to procreate. And I think that
our capacity for storytelling and design and for making
art and tools and stories. Um, AND just the
fact that we feel really bored when we're not
doing things and making things. Um, I think that
might be if there is some kind of purpose
or some way in which we've evolved to feel
that we need to be doing things. I think
creating might be it, but I'm not sure that
procreating, uh, is there. And I think that one.
Uh, YOU know, piece of evidence for that is
that we have a falling birth rate in so
many countries now that there are more and more
opportunities for people, particularly for women, to gain an
education, to create, to invent, to pursue other other
things. Um, AND I think there is an impulse
to to create meaning, but I don't think that
the only way that we get that meaning is
is through having children. Uh, YOU know, the, the,
the sort of the cynical person might look at
the idea that our purpose is to procreate as
as almost an outsourcing of meaning, you know, rather
than creating your own meaning, you're putting it onto
your children. I, I think that we have so
much capacity to do so many things. Um, IT
would be almost sad to think that. Um, THE
only way to have meaning and to have purpose
is, is through procreation.
What about that kind of argument, and this one
is really very common, that people say, oh, but
everyone does it, or I mean there's even cases
unfortunately where people feel socially pressured, particularly women, to
procreate because everyone Around them is saying that they
should do it or they see everyone around them
having children, but arguments based on, I'm not sure
what I should call this kind of argument based
on popularity or whatever. I mean, the, the idea
that, oh, everyone does, uh, what do you think
about that?
I think it's a very, it's very common way
to to reason your way into a habit or
a or a life practice or a major life
decision. Um, BUT I think that it's one that
in sort of the generation that is now coming
of age, there has been there have been enough
generations before them that had to sort of make
a more active choice about having children and the
number of older pairs around them who are not
having children or older single people who are choosing
not to not to have a partner or children.
Is giving them role models of the way that
that can be. And making that a more available
option, because of course peer pressure has played a
massive role or or social expectations have played a
massive role in setting people's life trajectories. And the
question of whether or not to have children, I
think we can compare to the question of whether
or not to be married, um, you know, maybe
two decades earlier, if we imagine these these, uh,
social patterns moving. At about the same pace, but
I think the marriage question opened a little earlier
than the whether to have children question. Um, AND
of course, for a long time, people were married,
well, women were married because they didn't have a
separate option to be financially secure for a long
time. But I think for a long time men
were getting married because it was the done thing
and because it was it was expected that you
you get a job, you get married and you
have children. And I think that You know, there
was a a a huge opening up of that
question, um, in at least in, in Western Europe,
um, in the 70s and 80s about why is
it that we are all getting married and what
is the meaning of this? And of course part
of that had to do with shifting cultural conceptions
of of marriage and movements away from um from
religion as a key part of that because of
course for a long time marriage wasn't just a
social practice, it was a sacrament and we can't
forget that aspect of things. Um, AND I think
that In the same way that people Started thinking
more critically about why and whether to get married,
you know, do we need to involve the state
in our relationship, that kind of thing, um. PEOPLE
are now thinking more widely about whether or not
to have children. But it's I I think it
would also be a mistake to think about this
is purely a question of choice, because one phenomenon
that is very much attributable, um, when it comes
to the falling birth rate in a lot of
countries is the cost of having children and the
practical burdens of having children. Um, AND I think
that the falling birth rate is not only down
to people's Deliberate choice to go and pursue other
things out of sheer desire. It's also because it's
become really, really, really difficult to raise a child,
and we see a lot of, Uh, countries trying
to impose pro-natalist policies in order to reverse the
falling birth rate, but they are very much prob
policies rather than pro parenting, pro child rearing. Parents
are not going to take that kind of burden
on without sufficient social support. And it means that
people who would have really liked to have children
are increasingly not able to do so. So that's
a separate part of the The coin, I guess
another side, this coin now has so many sides,
but um there's another side of of the coin
when it when we look at. The choice of
parenthood, um, and the fact that so many people
are not making that choice now.
Yeah, and of course I mean we could get
here into a discussion about how perhaps we should
change our economic systems for people to have better
economic conditions which would of course also translate into
their decision to procreate or not, but I think
that if Uh, unfortunately, people find themselves in, uh,
economically complicated situations and they decide to not procreate,
uh, they're making a responsible decision,
correct? I mean. In some ways, yes, that is
an answer to that question. If you can't afford
to raise a child, then many people would see
that as a responsible decision. On the other hand,
people have been raising children in poverty for generations,
and I would never want to say that, uh,
those people are behaving morally wrongly. I think that
it's incredibly unjust that there are so many people
in a, you know, in in the lowest economic
strata who through through no fault of their own,
through the failings of society should be seen as
as moral failures if they have children the same
way that people in more privileged economic strata are
are doing. So I I, when it comes to
the the question of, well, should you have a
child in poverty? Should you have a child in
a war zone? I think that it's not just
about individual responsibility. There are also really important questions
about social justice, um, and, and privilege versus oppression
that come into that picture. For many people who
want to have children, uh, that is one of
life's great pursuits and great joys. And to say,
well, it's just irresponsible of you to do that,
um, is, I think, deeply unfair.
Yeah, also because we have to take into account
that apart from what we've already talked about when
it comes to cultural and social pressure put on
people to procreate, there's in the specific case of
people who live in poverty or in diver. Your
socioeconomic circumstances, it's also, we also have to take
into account the fact that they don't have more
many times they don't have the access to the
necessary educational resources and to birth control, contraception, and
so on.
Yeah, exactly. I mean, access to reliable contraception, access
to abortion. These are these are not just personal
choices, but they're also political facts and economic facts.
And if we levy blame and and accusations of
irresponsibility against those who have children in less than
ideal circumstances, because they did not have access to
the tools for making a genuinely autonomous choice, then
we're just layering injustice upon injustice at that point.
No, no, that's definitely a very important point to
make. And what about when people say that, oh,
I want to have children because I will eventually
grow old and I want to have someone to
take care of me.
I think it's an absolutely bananas justification. I, I,
for one thing, um, I think that at that
0.1 is almost treating the, the hypothetical future child
as a social safety net. Um, AND that is
a form of instrumentalization, but it's also putting expectations
on your child that they may not be in
any position. To fulfill or may not want to,
um, you're neglecting the possibility that the child might
be the one needing care, you know, disabilities exist,
illnesses come out of nowhere, accidents happen, it may
well be that. You know, an aging parent is,
is caring for their, um, chronically ill or disabled
child well into their 60s, 70s, 80s. Life doesn't
just hand you that sort of, uh, idealized, um,
linear storyline. Um But there's also the the kind
of the the fairly cruel facts, I suppose, and
disappointing fact for for many people that, um, Children
are their own people, and if you Have a
child expecting that that child will dutifully stay at
home and care for you in your old age,
you're overlooking the possibility and a possibility that one
would think that good parents should be encouraging that
that child might want to make their own life,
might move abroad, or or have their own family
who needs care themselves. You kind of 11 shouldn't
impose a certain expectation on a child that hasn't
even been born yet that will constrain their life
opportunities. Um. Because for one thing, I, I, I,
I guess. You know what, if you're if you're
having a child, you would hope that part of
being a good parent to that child is to
want as many doors to be open to them
as possible. And if you're having a child already
mentally closing the doors that might take them away
from your hometown or would make them unable to
care for you in your old age, um. It
does seem that one is not going about procreation
with the open mind that that we would associate
with this this idea of good parenthood. But of
course, what makes someone a good parent is a
whole other field of philosophy separate from, well, not
entirely separate from procreative ethics, the two are obviously
intertwined. You know, there are, there are entire reams
of books about this this other question of what
is good parenthood. So, um. Yeah, I, I could
be talking about that all day as well.
What about the idea, and this is sort of
an argument from duty that we see coming out
of the mouths of many, particularly right wing pro-Natalists,
and some of them politicians who even try to
promote pro-NATOism even through policy where they say that
as part of, for example, a particular nation or
as part of the human species more broadly, you
have a duty to procreate, you have a duty
to contribute to the continuation of our species or
of a particular nation, society, community, etc.
Yeah, I mean, this is certainly an argument that
you hear from right wing politicians in places like
Hungary, and places like the US, um, Poland, um,
in the UK we have our own pro-natalists, uh,
in, in the Reform Party. Um, AND this question
of whether one has a duty to the nation.
It It opens a new set of questions and
possible tensions between duties to duties to the nation,
or, you know, what what we might call civic
duties. Um. As something that can come up in
tension, perhaps with our duties to um other people
around us, uh, someone who already cares for their
their own parents or a or a sibling. Uh,
HAS duties that might come into conflict with duties
to to care for a child, but also the
duties we might have to those children. Uh, AND
of course, you know, the, the, the, the classical
philosophers will be hammering at the walls at this
point going, you can't have duties to someone who
doesn't exist. But we do talk about, uh, you
know, an idea of procreative responsibility as something that
can apply to to hypothetical children. Um, THE idea
that we might have a duty to society to
procreate is one that I think only. CAN only
be made sense of if we also build in
duties that society has to parents. So I don't
think we can make straight the idea that anyone
has a duty to to bear that the bear
the next generation to bring forth the children of
the state, unless we also have a really strong
idea of, uh, you know, society as having shared
obligations to those children. Um. And, and the, you
know, the bringing the the the the idiom that
it takes a village to raise a child into
state infrastructure in a very real way. Um, BECAUSE
if you're going to expect that people bring forth
the next generation, but also leave them alone to
do it without any resources, without any help, you're
essentially suggesting that there can be a duty to
take on a massive asymmetric burden. So that the
next generation or so that the aging generation who
who will need doctors and nurses and carers in
the future, so that they can benefit without them
having having to do that work, or to put
anything into the shared pot. And there are some
philosophers who who have kind of explored the idea,
um, that children are a social resource. And that
there might, you know, it's very, it's very difficult
to to square the idea that someone could have
an obligation to create other people. Um, IT'S one
that, that, you know, we have to answer questions
like who do you owe that duty to? Why
is it that, uh, someone's body can be a
a a national resource in a way that creates
these these incredibly burdensome individual duties. There's a lot
of a lot of things going on there. Um,
AND I think that one can put that philosophical
conversation aside to some extent and think, OK, practically
speaking, we do need more people if we're going
to maintain certain kinds of social structures, if we're
going to have people who, you know, provide care
for for aging populations, and so on and so
forth. But just suggesting that individuals have the duty
to take on procreation and child rearing in order
to fix that, rather than saying, OK, if this
is a social problem, it needs to have a
social solution. And we need to think about how
everyone is going to pitch in to, to, um,
complete the jigsaw, then it will, it just falls
apart at that point. You, you, you can't, um,
can't patch the patch the hole by just saying,
well, you know, individual citizens should take this on.
Mhm. Yes, also because, uh, and I'm not completely
sure whether this question still falls under the rubric
of reproductive ethics, but I imagine that at least
partially so. Also when it comes to pro-natalism, as
you referred to there, I mean it usually. ENTAILS
the state, the nation, having some sort of control
over people's bodies, and that usually manifests or translates
into control over women's bodies or the bodies of
people who can get pregnant and produce children. And
so some of those policies that are promoted by
pro-Natalists go against or violate the reproductive rights of
women, and that's also an issue that we should
consider.
Absolutely. I think there's broadly speaking, two kinds of
pro-natalist policies and one of those kinds is, as
you just mentioned, the kind of policy that tries
to encourage childbearing by reducing people's access to contraception
and abortion. Um, AND you can't, uh, I in
my, in my view anyway, you can't justify. Encroaching
on someone's rights as a citizen, uh, because, you
know, removing access to abortion does, um, Make women
unequal citizens. Um, IN the eyes of the state,
at that point, you are treating their bodies as
a as a social resource rather than something that
they should be autonomously deciding on. Um, So I,
I don't think you can impose that kind of,
uh, policy on the basis of, of a claim
that people have civic duties to to to bear
children. I think at that point, it, it just
completely falls apart, um, that the internal logic doesn't
work. The other kind of pro-natalist policy is the
the kind of Paternalists encouraging people to have children
by providing incentives. Um, SO tax breaks for, for
people who have 4 or more children, um, or
as is the case in, um, in Hungary a
few years ago, Orban introduced this, this policy that
a woman who had, uh, 4 children or more
was exempt from income tax for the rest of
her life. And the interesting thing about that policy
is that it's only the woman who is exempt
from income tax. But of course, if you have
4 children, and you live in a country like
Hungary, in which the gender wage gap is, is
fairly atrocious, um, the, the mother in that family
is almost certainly not going to be the one
going to work. And so her partner will still
be paying income tax. So it's a, um, a
pro-natalist policy disguised as this very generous tax break
for for families who Complete their civic duty and
and procreate for the rest of the nation, but
it, it doesn't actually do anything. So there's that
kind of policy. There's also the subset of that
kind of approach, which, uh, our, our lovely reform
politicians here in the UK have recently been been
on record as suggesting, which is to impose an
extra tax, of punitive tax on, uh, child free
women. Um, AS a sort of punishment either for
their their infertility. I'm not sure how they would
go about this to make sure that women who
haven't who who've had, you know, recurrent miscarriages, for
example, or who have not been able to get
pregnant are not punished in the same way as
as women who simply choose not to have children.
But again, a very punitive approach and one that
targets women. So by nature, incredibly, uh, Un-egalitarian and
anti-feminist. Um, AND any policy that focuses on procreation
will inevitably have a greater effect on, on women's
bodies because, you know, as the site in which
we create children, um, the female body is always
going to be the object of the most scrutiny,
the most surveillance, the most control in any of
these, uh, sort of. Policy based frameworks for trying
to change the way that people procreate.
OK, so for the last part of our conversation,
I would like to ask you about anti-Natalism, which
is the opposite of pro-Natalism. I mean, I know
that there are different arguments that people use to
defend anti-Nalism or their own anti-Nalist positions, but what
do you think about anti-Nalism as a Um, position
in reproductive ethics.
Well, it's certainly not a very popular position. I
can tell you that there's a, there's a couple
of sort of predominant antenatalists, um, on the scene.
Um, BUT it's, it's, uh, It's an approach that
many people will use as a as a lens
for other policies as a kind of reductio ad
absurdum, or um or will use. As a contrast
position for their own view, but there are very
few people who actually defend the idea that we
should all simply stop procreating. Um, AND part of
the reason for that is. I think that. Antenatalism.
WILL be very, very, very hard to defend as
a as a persuasive position that people should genuinely
adopt. I think philosophers, like everyone else knows that
know that so many people will want to have
children, that you're you're simply not going to get
the whole of humanity on board with your with
your proposal. Um, AND Uh, well, of course, there
are many philosophical positions defended at different points that
are not taken up by the whole of humanity,
you do sort of want your position to be
one that you could at least theoretically see people
taking up and going, yeah, do you know what,
we think this guy is right. Um, SO I
think part of the reason that people have been
veering away from really strongly defending antenatalism is that
they think that it's just not plausibly going to
be persuasive for the vast majority of people. Um,
I think the other sort of major reason, um,
that people don't want to defend antenatalism is that
for all of the internal logic in some antenatalist
arguments, people find it very difficult to accept the
final conclusion that it will be for the best
if humanity simply goes extinct. I think a lot
of people are still quite attached to humanity and
to the human species, whether out of uh Sort
of strong survival instinct or a kind of hopeful
optimism that despite everything in history, humanity can somehow
turn this around and make things work. Um, YOU
know, the idea that there is something very valuable
about our continued existence is strongly embedded enough and
and widely shared enough that I think that prevents
people who might otherwise see the. The reasoning in
a in an antenatalist argument and go, OK, well,
I sort of see how that broadly works, but
not want to accept that final conclusion that there
that there is, um, Really like a a benefit
somehow to humanity going extinct or that or if
not a benefit that that is at least a
less bad outcome than people continuing to have children.
Um That said, of course, these are philosophical positions.
They are broadly theoretical, uh, and without naming any
names. Um, ONE of the most predominant voices in
antenatalism himself has two children. So I think there's
a kind of an irony to the fact that
people can promote this kind of philosophical perspective. Um,
BUT even then not fully subscribed to it, not,
not be able to, to follow through. So, um,
yeah, it's a it's certainly an interesting field of
philosophy. And there's a few different ways that people
go about defending antenatalism and some of those I
think are are more persuasive, um, than others. Um,
AND some of them are the kind of positions
that one can look at and go, well, but
that wouldn't necessarily apply to me. I would be
a I would be a much better parent or
I would have the circumstances that could avoid. That
kind of harm. Um, SO one of the kind
of big arguments for antenatalism is the idea that
pretty much all life involves a little bit of
suffering or a lot of suffering. Um, AND so
if you bring a new person into existence, you're
sort of inflicting that suffering on someone who couldn't
possibly consent to be exposed to it. Um, AND
I think that's a position that many people might
look at and go, OK, I can see the
reasoning. But I would be able to protect my
child from that or I think that, you know
what small amounts of suffering are inevitable in a
human life, I think could be outweighed by all
the good things that I could provide to my
child. I think that's that's a way that people
can. Even if they're convinced by the philosophy, they
might be able to think their way into an
exception and go, yeah, but it would still be
OK for me.
I mean, one of the arguments, or I think
perhaps even the argument from anti-atalism that I find
the most convincing is the argument from risk. I
mean that argument that basically says that. Uh, THERE'S
always, uh, even if people say that, oh, but
my child might have a good life, uh, I
mean, there's always that possibility, but the argument from
risk says, OK, but uh, you're not sure that,
uh, if that's going to be true. I'm, and
there's a big, big, big risk that your child
will suffer or, or to uh to different degrees
across life. And you're putting he or she through
that kind of risk unnecessarily. Basically, uh, if you
decide to reproduce, you're sort of playing Russian roulette,
so and uh Russian roulette with, with, with, uh,
um, I mean a lot, a lot of bullets
there because the the probability of suffering is very,
very, very high. What do you think of that?
I think it's, yeah, it's it's interesting. I think
the way that people understand risk, um, in the
field of reproduction is detached from the real picture.
And I think that we sort of keep things
that way almost deliberately. I don't think people know
the full picture of reproductive risk when they are
actually trying for a baby. It's the kind of
thing that many people will never sort of really
look up all of the the the statistical data
on. Um, AND it's certainly something that we, we
don't broadcast. Um, WE now, let, let me give
you an example. I think most people, if you
said to them, if you have a baby now,
there's a 50% chance that baby will have a,
a serious disability. Most people can understand that risk
and go, oh well, I, I don't, I don't
want, I don't want to do that then. The
actual pictures when it comes to childhood disability are
so far removed from that. And we have so
much, uh, infrastructure now available to us that allow
us to sort of assess the risk of things
like, uh, like childhood disability when you are trying
for a baby and when you are pregnant. What
I think people don't bring into that picture is
the monumental proportion of childhood disability or lifelong disability.
That has nothing to do with the gestational period
or the circumstances under which one conceives. There are
far, far, far more disabilities caused through childhood illness
and accidents after the age of 4 than are
congenital or that are caused by, uh, deficiencies or
injuries during gestation. I think a lot of people
think about the risks involved in procreation. With a
very isolating lens on the period during which you
are making the child, but we don't factor in
the possibilities of of illnesses or accidents after the
child is born. But I think the thing that
makes that level of risk tolerable, the kind of
the risk of things going on later, is that
once you have the child, most people really, really,
really love their children. Um, AND I think that
that is something that helps people to deal with
the, the sorrows and the burdens that can arise
once the child already exists. So in some ways,
it's very irrational of us to focus our our
risk-based reasoning and our our lens of what could
go right and what could go wrong purely on
the period in which we're trying to make a
child. But on the other hand, it's, it's completely
logical because once you have a child, now there
is this person who is alive, has, has interests
that can be kind of weighed up and down,
um, and who is the object usually of a
huge amount of love. Um, AND that I think
changes not only our experience of, of risk and,
and, uh, the ways that we understand what can
go right or wrong, uh, in, in child rearing,
but it also reframes pretty much everything important about
the decisions that we then make about our children.
Uh, YOU know, the same kind of question about,
0, 50%, you know, if would you still have
a baby? Parents no longer think that way once
the child exists and is in their arms, you
know, we we we change our entire mindset between
the the hypothetical child and the real child.
Yeah, and when it comes to suffering and pleasure,
I mean, I guess that it's very easy for
us to imagine almost an endless number of ways
that we can suffer in life. I mean, there
are also, of course, many ways that we can
experience pleasure, but it seems to me. More or
less obvious that they are much fewer than the
number of ways we can suffer, and as a
very famous antenatalist philosopher says, I'm paraphrasing, there's such
a thing as chronic pain, but there's no such
thing as chronic pleasure.
So that's David Benatar, isn't it? Yeah, I mean,
I, I, I understand his reasoning, but Um, I
think there is such a thing as chronic pleasure.
We just don't call it chronic because it's a
good thing. Um, WE tend not to, you know,
someone who can't sleep at night constantly has chronic
insomnia, but someone who just falls asleep at night
like a log and and has their 8 hours
and is up and ready to go and has
that every night. It's not chronic. It's just good.
It's just nice. We don't comment on it. We
think, oh, yeah, great. You know, what, what, what
kind of tea do you drink to to get
to sleep that way? It's, it's just a good
thing. And we don't comment on things that are
just consistently good and nice. Um. And that doesn't
mean that there aren't lots and lots of ways
in which life can be good and nice. So,
you know, no disrespect to David Benatar, but um,
I think that. Yes, much as there are. Hundreds
of different ways in which one can be injured
or ill or or or upset or depressed. There
are hundreds and thousands of ways in which one
can find joy in life. Um, AND I agree
that they're they're not, uh, They don't balance each
other in the same kind of way. I I
I agree with Benatar's idea that there is an
asymmetry between harm and and pleasure in the sense
that we don't have any obligation to produce a
happy child. Um, BUT we do have an obligation,
um, to prevent the birth of a miserable child.
Like if we knew for sure that a child
would be unhappy. I think most people would agree
there isn't there is a moral duty not to
bring that person into existence. But if we had
a duty to bring happy people into existence, it
would cause havoc with any ideas of. Responsibility and
bodily autonomy that we might have. So I I
I agree with the asymmetry, but I do think
that it's quite a Unfair and maybe slightly pessimistic
outlook on life to say, well, there's very finite
ways to be happy, but infinite ways to be
miserable. I think that there's just so many ways
to to to find joy in life. And maybe
the answer to the kind of chronic pain versus
chronic happiness thing is that we just need to
start talking about when we are happy a bit
more and and and start naming it and pointing
it out. Then what we might be a bit
more aware of it then.
Well, I hope you're, you're correct. Anyway, let me
just ask you one last question in regards to
anti-natalism. I mean, philosophically, ethically, putting aside for a
second the fact that probably no one will ever
be able to convince all of humanity to stop
reproducing and. Do you think that antenatalism is a
philosophically sound position and philosophically and ethically a position
that should be taken seriously?
Oh, that's a, that's a big question. I think
that at least as far as the actual argument
is concerned, um, I do think that, uh, Benetta's
sort of he he has two separate arguments for
antenatalism. I think this one that focuses on the
asymmetry between harm and pleasure is one that's worth
considering seriously. Um, IF for no other reason that
it helps us to to dig into these ideas
of what a good life might be and what
a sort of What kind of life is worth
bringing into existence or what kind of life isn't.
Um, AND I think that part of the reason
we should be taking it seriously is precisely what
I said at the beginning of of our discussion
that these are now questions that the question of
should I have a child is a question that
now that we can deliberately and consciously make that
choice, we should be very deliberately and consciously thinking
about it. Um, AND I think that You know,
for all the, the intuitive, oh my goodness, what
is he thinking, uh, that antenatalist arguments might provoke.
I think it's really helpful to be provoked in
that way and to open the question more broadly
of what kind of reasons we might have for
having children and whether they are good reasons. Um,
BECAUSE now that we can choose to bring someone
new into existence, we should be thinking more carefully
about, well, what, what right do I have to
bring someone into existence? And am I going to,
am I choosing to do that in a way
that is good for that person? Lindsay Porter has
a wonderful um account of the the responsibilities of
parenthood in which she she does describe it through
this lens of choosing for someone. And she says
that, you know, you imagine. On a very low
stakes kind of case, you're, you're in a restaurant
with your friend and they have to go and
take a phone call, just, you know, and then
the waiter comes. You're, if you choose for your
friend, you have a responsibility to choose well. You
can't just pick the first thing off the menu
for them. You have to, you know, think about
what you know about them, what they like and
and try and make that choice as well as
possible. So multiply that by a million, and that's
making the choice to bring someone into existence. And
you have to make that as good a choice
as possible, not just by choosing the circumstances under
which you make that child might bring them into
into being, but also all of the choices you
then make to follow up on that, you know,
how are you going to make that choice in
retrospect, a good choice? Well, you're going to try
and do everything you can to make their life
worthwhile. Um, AND so, yeah, the antenatalist is not,
I think going to persuade many people, but many
people should read the antenatalist. I think we should
be having that that discussion more openly and more
frequently, because the broader discussion of how and why
we have children, I think is so important to
have and so valuable. Um, AND one that we,
we don't have all of the the conceptual framework
for yet. It's not something that people still feel
comfortable opening up in, in, in that way and
subjecting it to the kind of scrutiny that we
subject so many of our other life choices to.
I think people put so much more consideration on
the kind of um. I'm making a big generalization
here, but in the public consciousness, we have, uh,
huge discussions on a regular basis about the choice
to to to fly or to eat meat or
to to buy fast fashion, these kind of choices
that we make, and their impact on on the
world and on other people. I think we need
to get more comfortable with having that discussion about
making new people.
Great, so let's send on that note then and
uh I will be linking of course to our
first interview, which was on your book, The Artificial
Wombon Trial. And uh would you like to tell
people where they can find you and your work
on the internet?
Absolutely, um, my website is Teresa Barron.co.uk and I'm
also on Phil People and Google Scholar. Um, SO
you can find my work there.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show again. It's been
a very fascinating conversation and it's always a pleasure
to talk with you.
It was my pleasure too. Thank you so much,
Ricardo.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights, Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at lights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mulleran, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingberrd, Arnaud Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andre, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoo, and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Cerri, Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezara Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Puntervan Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis, Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel P
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffyanny Smith,
and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno,
Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David
Williams, Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert
Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark
Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular, Jannes Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov,
Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special
thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank, Lucas
Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Al
Nick Cortiz, and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.